---
title: "Introduction and Overview"
date: 2023-01-30
slug: "intro-and-overview"
description: "What we will be learning in the PlainText Working Group"
draft: false
math: true
toc: true
---

## Workshop Description and Objectives

This working group is meant to give a short introductions to a set of
plain text and open source tools for doing and writing up research. Many
people have been exposed to these tools before, but the startup costs
are non-negligible and we tend to fall back on the tools that are most
ubiquitous rather than those that best suit our work. Unlike a
traditional workshop at the University of Chicago, or a one time
tutorial, we intend for this working group to allow interested students,
post-docs and faculty to overcome the initial time investment and
troubleshoot together to adopt a different and more appropriate set of
tools for our research.

Some of these tools are applicable to anyone doing research and writing,
in the humanities, social sciences or natural sciences, and some of the
tools will be most helpful to scholars doing quantitative research. The
tools that we are going to be working with represent a fundamentally
different workflow and ethos than the Office toolkit and is
distinguished in three ways: portability, reproducibility and elegance.
More than just typesetting documents and using tools that are free, we
will be thinking about how we do our research in a more orderly and,
most importantly, *reproducible* way. We will be covering the following
topics:

1.  The Command Line and Project Organization

2.  Document composition and typesetting with LaTeX, `pandoc`, Markdown
    and Make

3.  Creating Beautiful and Convincing figures in `R` with `ggplot`

4.  Creating Cogent and Potent Tables

5.  Bibliographic management with Zotero and Bibtex

6.  Version Control and Collaboration with `Git` and GitHub

No previous programming or computing experience is expected, just
literacy with a keyboard and mouse is required.

## The Command Line and Project Organization

In this meeting we will begin by discussing our experiences with
collecting data and writing up our research, with a particular emphasis
on the means by which we get things done. Important to note that we are
not lingering on this process for its own sake but with a particular
goal in mind: communicating insight in a transparent and reproducible
way. We will then cover the basics of the Command Line and then how to
organize a directory with all the material for your research. Though we
will not directly address how you should organize the process of
completing your project, the workaday techniques of interacting with
your files and folders related to your project will help to keep both
mind and research ordered and clear.

Meeting Date: February 3rd, 2023 --- Noon to 2PM

## Document Composition: LaTeX, `pandoc`, Markdown and Make

This is the heart of our working group; at a certain point after
completing your data collection and doing your analyses, you are going
to want to communicate what you have learned. At this point, the
document you are composing becomes the heart and focus of your research.
Academics, researchers and scientists of all stripes use documents to
both get clear on how they are thinking about the things they are
learning, and to communicate those things to their colleagues and
general audiences. Taking very seriously how we both make an argument
and share that argument will improve the fruits of our research
projects. In this meeting we focus on the latter and will learn how to
compose documents in Markdown and use `pandoc` and LaTeX to typeset them
into beautiful formats. What more, we will touch on using Make to
compile your projects. This last feature will be particularly useful to
quantitative scholars, who need to update tables and figures in their
documents when the underlying data changes.

Meeting Date: February 17th, 2023 --- Noon to 2PM

## Creating Beautiful and Convincing figures in `R` with `ggplot`

Pictures may not be able to say a thousand words but they are certainly
an excellent way for quickly communicating complex relationships to your
audience, particularly when you are using quantitative data. What more,
when you have to present your research at a conference or a job talk,
visualizations are an important tool for maintaining your audience's
interest. Unfortunately, many scientific visualizations are clumsily
made, and do a better job of obscuring an argument or relationships than
explicating them.

In this meeting we will go through some of the most important features
of visualizations, what to do and what not to do, and then how to
actually create figures in `R` with the `ggplot` library. We will also
cover diagramming, a helpful tool for everyone and discuss the Matcha
Notebook software and the LaTeX library TikZ.

Meeting Date: March 3rd, 2023 --- Noon to 2PM

## Creating Cogent and Potent Tables

Tables, like visualization, are an excellent tool for summarizing
critical information from your data and emphasizes the power of your
technically complicated data analyses. But just like scientific
visualizations, tables are often times poorly constructed and do a
better of job of obscuring your argument than clarifying it. Table
construction abides by a different set of principles than visualizations
and we will cover them in this workshop and share some good examples of
what to do and not do.

Meeting Date: TBD, Spring Quarter

## Bibliographic Management with Zotero and Bibtex

Mounting a new argument with the data you collected yourself and
analyzed almost certainly will require that you reference past works,
and keeping track of what you are referencing. Including references to
the documents that have guided and informed your own research is
critical to ensuring that you are not inadvertently committing fraud and
for making your own process of argumentation clearer. This task is
somewhat burdensome but fortunately there are several tools which help
managing references and automatically generating bibliographies in your
documents, with all the proper formatting, very very easy. That means
you will not be endlessly googling what the appropriate formatting is
for APA style citations, or ASA style, or MLA, or any other esoteric and
obtuse academic convention no one ever taught you. We will be advocating
the use of one bibliographic management tool, Zotero, but pretty much
any of the major bibliography softwares will be compatible with the
other tools we are using, as we will be relying upon the Bibtex format
to store compiled lists of references.

Meeting Date: TBD, Spring Quarter

## Version Control and Collaboration with `Git` and GitHub

One of the primary benefits of doing and writing your research in a
plain text format is that whole collections of plain text files can be
tracked with a software known as `Git`. This software allows you to
track all the changes that occur to all the files in your project
directory, as well as keeping backups in a remote location, and a
complete log of all changes that have occurred to them. What more, it
allows you to share your work with collaborators, track all the changes
that they make to the documents and to arbitrate when there are
conflicts between versions.

Meeting Date: TBD, Spring Quarter

## Requirements

To participate in the working group it will be important that you have a
laptop that is capable of accommodating the software we will be learning
to use. The performance requirements for the software are not burdensome
so pretty much any modern computer will be usable but you will need
sufficient memory to install LaTeX and the other software. About 7GBs of
memory is sufficient for everything. Guides for installing all the
required software will be distributed in advance of the workshop and the
expectation is that you will come to working group meetings ready to
start using and troubleshooting the software.
